Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are
talking about a group of Soviet spies.
But they weren’t your average
Soviets spies; they were members
of Britain’s ruling elite.
Highly educated, upper-class
men thought to be the best and
brightest of British society.
Men who, to the outside world, were at
the very top of the British establishment,
but behind closed doors, they fed
information to an ideological enemy
for a period spanning three decades.
As this is such an incredible story, with
so many weird and wonderful facts, twists,
turns, stories and personalities, this
is going to be a three part mini-series
on the group dubbed “the Cambridge Five”.
Today, in episode one, we will take a
look at the backgrounds and recruitment of
these men, of these spies, with a little
historical context to help us properly
appreciate the magnitude of what they did.
In part-two, we’ll look at their
actual spywork, the ingenious ways
they did it, and, of course, the
top secret information they stole.
And in part-three, we’ll get into their
downfall, how their story ended, and how,
in some respects, they got away with it.
OK then, let’s get into it and talk
about the Cambridge Five - the Soviet
spy ring hidden in plain sight.
It was a July afternoon in
London’s Regents Park, in 1934.
It was a clear, hot day, and
the sun was high in the sky.
Birds chirped, and children played.
Park benches lined the paths, and
Londoners lounged lazily in the shade.
A 22-year-old man named Kim Philby,
looking rather nervous, made his way
through the park wearing a shirt and
tie, despite the sticky summer heat.
He hadn’t planned to come to the park that
day, but set off after his wife had told
him, rather mysteriously, that she had
arranged for him to meet, and I’m quoting
directly, ‘a man of decisive importance’.
She told him nothing more,
only the time and location.
Not knowing what to expect, he sat
down on a bench and tried to blend in.
After a few minutes he saw a
stocky, short man approaching.
He introduced himself as ‘Otto’, and spoke
with a strong eastern European accent.
Looking around, Otto made small talk
and complained that he hated London.
He much preferred Paris, he said.
It wasn’t long before Otto cut to the
chase, he stopped with the small talk and
revealed the true purpose of the meeting.
Otto turned and said that someone
like Philby, someone from his family
background, could be of great use.
He could make a much greater impact than
a mere ‘run-of-the-mill party member’.
Philby nodded, saying nothing.
“You must stop communicating with all
the friends I tell you to if you want
to go ahead with this”, Otto said.
Eventually the men came to an agreement,
and a few moments later Otto left in
one direction, Philby the other, and the
two men slipped back into the anonymous
hustle and bustle of central London.
Officially, Otto was working at a nearby
university; unofficially, he was Arnold
Deutsch, a spy recruiter for the Soviets.
Deutsch had just recruited Kim Philby:
the most famous British double-agent
of all time, the biggest traitor,
some say, in British history.
That afternoon in Regent’s
Park was the first step in the
story of the Cambridge Five.
So, who were the Cambridge Five?
They are Kim Philby, who we heard about a
moment ago, Donald Maclean, Guy Burgess,
Anthony Blunt, and John Cairncross.
Though, of course, the story of the
Cambridge Five really begins at Cambridge
University, we should start first
with a bit of background on these men.
This is important because the types of
people the Cambridge Five were, and by
that I mean their class backgrounds, their
social status and the circles they moved
in, these were crucial to their spywork.
Now, what you need to understand
about the Cambridge Five is that
they all - besides one - came from
incredibly privileged backgrounds.
They were all born into Britain’s
upper-middle or upper-class,
were educated at the top private
schools, and came from ‘good’,
wealthy, families with connections.
To give you an idea of quite how high
up these men were in British society,
Donald Maclean was the son of Sir
Donald Maclean, a powerful Liberal Party
politician who was a Privy Councillor,
like an advisor, to the Royal Family.
Harold Adrian Russell Philby, known as
‘Kim’, the man from the London park a
couple of minutes ago, he was educated at
one of Britain’s most exclusive private
schools, Westminster, and he was the son
of a famous Arab scholar and diplomat
who advised the King of Saudi Arabia.
Guy Burgess, whose full name was
Guy Francis de Moncy Burgess, went
to school at the prestigious Eton
College, the school that has produced
a third of Britain’s Prime Ministers,
including Boris Johnson, and is
where Princes William and Harry went.
Anthony Blunt was a distant cousin
of the Queen Mother and fourth cousin
of Sir Oswald Mosley, the leader
of the British Union of Fascists.
He also had a suitably prestigious
education, going to Marlborough
College, another elite private school.
John Cairncross, on the other hand,
was a little different from the
other four of the Cambridge Five.
He was Scottish, first of all, and came
not from the same privileged background as
the others but from working-class roots.
He was born in Glasgow in 1913, the son
of an ironmonger and a primary school
teacher, but when he won a place at
Cambridge University, he was thrust
into the very top of British society.
And Cambridge University,
in the early-1930s, is where
our story really begins.
As you may know, or may remember
from episode number 276, Cambridge
University is not just one of the
most prestigious universities in
Britain, but it’s consistently ranked
as one of the best in the world.
Cambridge is a lot more meritocratic
now, but in the 1930s going to
study at Cambridge or Oxford was
a rite of passage for wealthy
and privileged young British men.
It was the expected step for young men
like Burgess, Philby, Maclean and Blunt.
Three or four years at Cambridge,
then a respectable job in government
or the army or the business world.
Kim Philby arrived to study History
and Economics; Maclean studied
modern languages; Burgess, history;
Blunt, who was the oldest of the
group, studied mathematics; and
Cairncross, studied French and German.
All five men were academically gifted,
that's to say, intelligent, but their
interests extended outside the library.
Moving in the same circles - meaning,
the same social groups - the five
met and became friends, and were all
known to be very sociable and active
in Cambridge’s exclusive social scene.
Burgess in particular, it was said,
bragged, or claimed of “knowing everybody
who was anybody, everywhere and anywhere.”
In fact, as we will see, socialising
and alcohol - and some of the men’s
struggles to control their alcohol
intake - this was a common theme
throughout their careers and it was partly
to blame for their eventual downfall.
Some of the Five were also active in
Cambridge’s ultra-elite secret societies.
Burgess and Blunt were both members
of the Cambridge Apostles and Pitt
Club, two private members clubs for
Cambridge’s ‘cream of the crop’ - that's
to say, the best of the best - that
have had kings, politicians and
famous academics as former members.
Outside this bubble of Cambridge, as you
will know, the 1930s was a time of great
economic upheaval and class tension.
The First World War had ended in
1918, at the end of the 1920s the
Great Depression had caused huge
hardship and suffering, and with it
came extreme political turbulence.
And specifically, the threat
of fascism across Europe.
For these young men and women at
Cambridge, men and women who felt they
were destined to go on to rule not only
the country, but large parts of the
world, the question remained: what sort
of world do we want to live in, what
sort of country do we want to rule?
It seemed like there were two
competing visions of the world: on
the one side, there was fascism,
Mussolini, Hitler, and Oswald Molsley
in the UK, and on the other, the
teachings of Karl Marx, communism.
For many who feared the rise of
fascism, there was only one logical
choice: support the communists.
And all five of these young men you
just heard about, Maclean, Burgess,
Philby, Blunt and Cairncross, they
all held what would be considered very
left-wing views and moved in circles,
or interacted with, groups with
links to the British Communist Party.
Well, as you might imagine, the
Soviets were hoping to find and win
over exactly these types of young,
ideological and impressionable men.
And it’s here that we need to
meet our friend Otto, the man
with the Eastern European accent
from the start of the episode.
Or rather, not Otto, but Arnold Deutsch.
In early-1934, Deutsch had been sent
by Soviet intelligence to London.
Deutsch's cousin was Oscar Deutsch,
the man who created the Odeon cinema
chain, which still exists today
by the way, and is actually the
largest cinema chain in the country.
Crucially, the respectable Oscar Deutsch
supported his cousin’s move to the UK,
meaning he was able to exist, to do his
spywork, under the radar, without the
knowledge of the British authorities.
Deutsch’s postgraduate work at the
University of London was a cover, of
course, and he was secretly working
as a recruiter with instructions from
Moscow to, and I’m quoting directly
‘cultivate young radical high-fliers
from leading British universities before
they entered the corridors of power.’
This mission brought him to that
bench in London’s Regent’s Park,
and resulted in the recruitment
of Kim Philby, the first of the
Cambridge Five, in the summer of 1934.
Philby later said that Deutsch “spoke
at great length, arguing that a
person with my family background and
possibilities could do far more for
Communism than the run-of-the-mill
Party member or sympathiser...
I accepted.
His first instructions were… that
I should break off as quickly
as possible all personal contact
with our Communist friends."
This was, of course, to make it
appear as though he was no longer a
communist sympathiser and strengthen
his cover - his fake identity.
His first mission was to spy on his
own father, the diplomat, as the
Soviets believed he could have had
important documents in his office.
From there, Philby recommended Burgess
and Maclean, then Burgess recruited Blunt,
and a little while later Burgess and
Blunt convinced Cairncross to join them.
The pitch, or the offer, was framed
in a way to not be explicitly
working for the Soviets, but rather,
against fascism and for peace.
Indeed, it wasn’t pitched as them
spying against Britain, but rather they
were providing information that would
help stop Britain falling to fascism.
Well, this was the case in the 1930s,
but as we will discover, it soon became
something altogether very different.
By the time the Five began to graduate
from Cambridge in the mid to late-1930s,
at least three, Philby, Maclean and
Burgess, and possibly more, had been
recruited and trained by the NKVD,
the Soviet intelligence wing that
would go on to be the famous KGB.
The exact timing and sequence of
their recruitment is a little murky,
or unclear, not only because they
were spies and it was all top secret,
obviously, but also because some of the
Five, notably Blunt, have cast doubt on
the fact that they were all recruited
while they were students at Cambridge.
The exact timings aren’t
crucial for our story.
Whether it was at university or
shortly after, they were all recruited,
they were full-blown Soviet spies,
with their own cryptonyms, that is,
their own secret spy names or codes.
Maclean was known as Homer, Burgess as
Hicks, Philby was Sonny or Stanley, Blunt
was Johnson, and Cairncross went by Liszt.
And these Soviet spies-in-waiting all
went on to secure the kind of jobs that
were beyond the Soviet’s wildest dreams.
So, what did they do?
That's to say, what were their
official jobs - their ‘covers’?
Maclean and Cairncross joined the Foreign
Office, becoming diplomats, essentially.
Guy Burgess initially worked for
a Conservative MP, a member of
parliament, before moving on to the
BBC, where he spent time interacting
with and interviewing politicians
and other influential figures
from the British establishment.
Blunt joined the army and then
moved onto MI5, the domestic
counterintelligence agency, essentially,
the internal spy department of the UK.
Kim Philby, however, was given a slightly
more interesting first mission, one I
think is worth considering for a moment
and that might be particularly interesting
for the Spanish listeners among you.
According to top secret MI5
files that were made public in
2011, Philby was sent to Spain.
He arrived in February of 1937,
shortly after the outbreak
of the Spanish Civil War.
Officially, he was there as a journalist,
covering the war for The Times newspaper.
The Times is a more right-wing
publication and was sympathetic to
the nationalists, that is, Franco’s
fascist army, not the Republicans.
Why is this relevant, you might be
thinking, and surely, if he was a spy for
the Soviets this seems like an odd choice.
It was all a cover, of course.
For the duration of his time in Spain,
Philby was stationed with, he was based
with, nationalist forces, supposedly
reporting for the British newspaper.
But his real mission was to ‘keep an
eye’ on troops, particularly the Italians
and Germans, and pass this information
back to the Soviets, who were, of
course, supporting the Republican cause.
Some historians believe that his
real mission, however, was something
altogether more exciting, and had
he pulled it off, would have had a
tumultuous impact on Spanish history.
And this was, according to a Soviet
officer who defected to the West, to
assassinate Franco, the Spanish dictator.
Now, this does seem slightly far-fetched,
slightly unlikely, as Philby had
no military training or experience.
And just in case you need a reminder,
Franco wasn’t assassinated, and he ruled
Spain from 1939 until his death in 1975.
It is incredible to think that the
young Philby would have been given
such a mission so early on in his
spying career, but as we will see
throughout this mini-series, the story
of the Cambridge Five is filled with
strange coincidences and lucky escapes.
Take for example the time when Franco’s
guards searched Philby but didn’t
find the piece of paper he had written
his secret codes down on - codes for
communicating and sending secret messages.
Philby then got lucky again in December
of 1937 when he was the sole survivor
after a bomb landed in front of his car.
The other passengers, all foreign
journalists too, were killed,
and the nationalist soldiers
used Philby as a propaganda tool.
Incredibly, he was even given the Red
Cross of Military Merit by Franco.
Now by the time the Second World
War had started in 1939, all of the
Cambridge Five had done exactly as
their Soviet handlers had hoped for.
They had established themselves
and started careers in key
branches of the British political
and intelligence establishment.
Some of them were in the Foreign
Office, or interacting with influential
people in the BBC and British Army.
As war in Europe began, the Cambridge
spy ring were also approached by
British intelligence, who thought
that their education, experiences
and contacts would make them
excellent candidates to be spies.
British spies, that is.
Philby was recruited into MI6, and some
of the others were interviewed or worked
informally for British intelligence.
Crucially, owing to their privileged
backgrounds and respected families,
very little [if any] security
checks were done on the men.
They were, simply put, assumed to be ‘good
chaps’ because of who they were - they had
come from good families, gone to the right
schools, gone to Cambridge, they behaved
like a British gentleman should behave.
They were perfectly positioned for
Act Two, what would turn out to be
the most prolific and treacherous
spy ring in British history.
Ok then, that’s it for part one on
this mini-series on the Cambridge
Five, part one of this wonderful story.
Next up we’ll get into the real ins and
outs of what they did, how they did it,
and how their personal vices got in the
way, or perhaps even helped them, in
their quest to betray their country.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.